When programmers want to assign data to a variable, they must first decide what type of data will be stored. For the AP Exam, there are four data types that make up the primitive data forms—i.e., the basic types of data. More complex data forms will be discussed later. 
integer (int) represents an integer number: positive numbers, negative numbers, and zero, with no decimals or fractions. Integers can store non decimal values from –2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647, inclusive. That’s a lot of values. 
double (double) represents a number that can be positive, negative, or zero, and can be a fraction or decimal…pretty much any number you can think of. It also has a much bigger breadth of upper and lower limits than an integer; it can express numbers with decades of significant digits. If you have to store an integer that is larger than the limits listed above, you must store the data as a double. 
On the AP Exam, you do not have to memorize the upper and lower limits of these numerical data types; you do, however, need to know that a double must be declared for a number that is larger than an integer can store. 
boolean (boolean) represents a value that is either true or false. In machine code, true is represented by 1 (or any nonzero value) and false is represented by 0. This data type is excellent for storing or using yes/no data, such as the responses to: Are you hungry? Are you excited about the AP Exam? Is this chapter boring?
character (char) represents any single character that can be represented on a computer; this type includes any character you can type on the keyboard, including letters, numbers, spaces, and special characters such as slashes, dashes, and the like. char values are stored using a single quotation mark or apostrophe (’). The values of the capital letters A through Z are 65–90 and lowercase letters are 97–122 (browse to unicode-table.com/en for a fancier, more complete listing of these values). Although the AP Exam does not require the memorization of these codes (thankfully), you should know their relative placement in the table. For example, you should know that character “A” comes before (has a lower numerical value) than character “B”; you should also note that every capital letter character comes before the lowercase letters. Therefore, “a” actually comes after “Z.” 
